IPC Section 302 — Punishment for Murder
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. (Note: IPC is now partially replaced by BNS 2023 for offences committed after July 1, 2024.)

IPC Section 304B — Dowry Death
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs under abnormal circumstances within seven years of marriage, and it is shown that she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or relatives in connection with demand for dowry, the husband or relatives shall be deemed to have caused her death. Punishment: imprisonment for not less than 7 years which may extend to life.

IPC Section 307 — Attempt to Murder
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.

IPC Section 354 — Assault or Criminal Force to Woman with Intent to Outrage Her Modesty
Any person who assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.

IPC Section 354A — Sexual Harassment
A man committing any of the following acts: (i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; (ii) demand or request for sexual favours; (iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; (iv) making sexually coloured remarks — shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment. Punishment: up to 3 years imprisonment.

IPC Section 376 — Punishment for Rape
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. In cases of gang rape, the minimum punishment is 20 years which may extend to life imprisonment.

IPC Section 379 — Punishment for Theft
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. Theft is defined under IPC Section 378 as the dishonest taking of any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent.

IPC Section 406 — Punishment for Criminal Breach of Trust
Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

IPC Section 420 — Cheating and Dishonestly Inducing Delivery of Property
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

IPC Section 498A — Husband or Relative of Husband of Woman Subjecting Her to Cruelty
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Cruelty includes willful conduct likely to drive a woman to suicide or grave injury, and harassment to coerce meeting unlawful demands for property (dowry).

IPC Section 499-500 — Defamation
Whoever, by words, either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. Punishment: up to 2 years imprisonment or fine or both.

IPC Section 505 — Statements Conducive to Public Mischief
Whoever makes, publishes, or circulates any statement, rumour, or report which is likely to cause fear or alarm to the public, or to any section of the public, whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against the public tranquillity shall be punished.
